# Readings
## Week One
<p>The progressive narrative formed in Robert Kendall’s Faith (2006) consists of five movements. Between each iteration the meaning shifts as words are added through a generative code. Text progresses from static to animated, with phrases twisting or toppling over, such as “off the rocker (yippee)” in the fourth movement (Kendall, 2006). It is an exploration of the author’s perspective of faith as a logical definition, combatted by their consideration of the word as a feeling. As an individual raised with a (now dissolved) religious background, the crumbling effect in the final sequence particularly resonates with my experience of the word.</p>
<p>The potential for digital writing to expand meaning making is potent here, as it is with David Jhave Johnston’s Sooth (2011). Johnston presents six flash-based poems to choose from in his collection. Each presents the user with a non-static image or video, from which lines of poetry emerge with each progressive click of the screen. The text shifts around the page with shaky unclarity, offering the user no comfort, juxtaposed to the notion of the title. The images are claustrophobic representations of discomfort, at times smothering the user in a blanket or situating them at the bottom of a fishtank. The unknowability of the poems is amplified by their progression to foreign languages, causing cascading anxiety through its cluttered, overstimulating webpage.</p>
<p>The hypertext fiction The Hunt for the Gay Planet (2016) by Anna Anthropy offers a different approach. The multi-choice Twine sci-fi asks the user to enter the mind of a queer protagonist searching the galaxy for a planet where she is accepted for her sexual orientation. It is written with a humorous, yet lamenting tone, with lines such as, “Could there be gay people here?”, and options like, “Look under a rock” (Anthropy, 2016). Other times the user becomes trapped in a circular code that loops the protagonist in a spiral, paralleling the author’s experience of the queer dating scene. Options are removed as the user progresses through each option, eventuating inevitably at “Lesbionica”, which the protagonist discovers is not the utopia she believed it would be (Anthropy, 2016).</p>
<p>Forgotten Nights (2022) features an audio poem developed by Peter Hebden. The poem transforms with each click between the binary options of “Another night” or “Reveal stars” (2022). Memory is a recurring theme throughout the piece, with the author narrating the poem as it continues through each sequence. With each selection the user makes the stars reduced and multiply around a crescent moon. It is a mournful, reflective collection of poems presenting an alternative means of digital writing outcomes. Each piece of literature I have mentioned has its own merit, yet none the contrast between Hebden’s poems and Anthropy’s, for example, resides in its opportunity for user reflection. Furthermore, while the other poems I have explored are seemingly unrelenting and chaotic, Hebden allows the user silence and imagery, offering a truly soothing experience.</p>

## Week Three
<p>Taroko Gorge (2009) is a digital poem cascading endlessly up the page, never reaching the bottom. There is something dissatisfying about this function. I, as the user, expect and desire the poem to come to an end. What is it trying to say through this presentation? Does it need to be saying anything? Can it function this way with no need for rationalisation? The structure of the poem suggests rigidity adhering to traditional forms of poetry while its digitisation diverts, upholding itself as something separate from convention. The poem feels more like an artwork than it does a poem – its meaning appearing unobtainable. N. Katherine Hayles notes the digital writing sphere is populated with creators who primarily call themselves “graphic artists” as opposed to writers (The Electronic Literature Organisation, 2007). Perhaps this distinction reveals a deeper understanding of Monfort’s intention. While I doubt Monfort places himself in the graphic artist category, Hayles’ comment states he is acting within a tradition of “multimodality” and is inevitably influenced by his peers. Therefore, perhaps the focus of Taroko Gorge is more centred on artistry than literature – or he makes no distinction between the two.</p>
<p>The same might be said about The Gathering Cloud (2016). Images ascend the page behind the text, obfuscating words. Users hover over text to learn the author’s definitions for them. Yet there seems to be no specific rationale behind Carpenter’s selection of definable words. The phrases are poetic, yet overall, the material reads like an educational booklet. Elsewhere, he overlays images with illustrated diagrams, further suggesting the medium is a work of art. While there is some user-interactivity, the interactable text seems to serve a function likened to a footnote in an article. Nevertheless, recurrent focus on motifs such as “cloud” provoke a critical reflection of each word’s meaning. Again, the presence of nature-centric themes appears, as in Taroko Gorge. This further spurs my consideration on the potential for meaning-making in the presentation of the two opposing forces. Intersections between organic and non-organic materials seems to be a reoccurrence in the genre. This provokes my desire to engage with it in future projects.</p>
<p>First Draft of the Revolution (2012) features a noblewoman exiled to a rural French village. The user engages with the text from the perspective of the exiled woman Juliette. The interactive component allows the user to re-write fragments of her letters to her husband Henri, who seemingly exiled her. Later, we observe the perspective of Henri’s sister Alise and Henri himself. Reliance on user interactivity causes me to wonder if it is not better defined as a game, rather than a work of literature. I come once more to the question of what defines e-literature. When does digital writing enter the domain of a video game? While the writing presents itself as promoting user agency, this is ultimately an illusion. The user is limited to the pre-determined outcomes of the author and cannot move forward with the plot if they do not rewrite everything the interface demands they rewrite. Yet perhaps it does not matter. The work successfully injects the user into the mind of an oppressed woman to consider its impacts on her. The definitions we prescribe to the medium therefore seem exceedingly counter-productive.</p>
<p>Andrew Plotkin’s Shade (2000) is a text-based interactive fiction with no reliance on a graphic interface. It does not present the user with potential options to select. The user must instead discover the correct path forward by typing out their movements in the text box. There are intrinsically right and wrong options to choose from. The perspective is presented in the second-person, situating the work firmly within the interactive fiction tradition (Douglass, 2008). Users are placed in the position of a person hungover, playing the part of the protagonist rather than watching the events unfold. Questions of memory and mortality arise as the story twists and likewise unravels. Simple commands must be entered to advance the narrative, implicitly prompting users to ask themselves “what if I try this?” The title Shade itself is a dialogue with prominent early works in the interactive fiction genre. A light source is historically essential in interactive fictions (Douglass, 2008). Meaning is thus expanded through Plotkin’s specificity of both the title and the lamp that lights the room. This, more than any other reading this week, makes me consider the capabilities of genre-dialogue in my own work. How might I implicitly or explicitly invoke greater meaning in my upcoming work of digital literature?</p>

## Week Four
<p>In my body – a Wunderkammer (1997) by Shelley Jackson we see the capabilities for creating intriguing, visual-led literature. The process is somewhat intimidating, as many things have been in this course from the outset. However, the illustrated body and the texts accompanying it are evocative. It instils within me an excitement for future projects, if I do not pursue this function in my own work this semester. Again, the potential for collaboration in this genre is perhaps what is most alluring about it. The artistic capabilities of literature are opening new possibilities to us as writers. Where in the past I have viewed digital writing – digital poetry in particular – to be inaccessible both in terms of writing and reading, works like this which promote embodiment and reader-writer intersections inspire me.</p>
<p>Twine seems to be the most accessible and most interesting tool I have encountered in this course. Coming from a history of writing Dungeons & Dragons campaigns and finding myself drawn to story-based videogames in adolescence, I am intrigued to see how this might translate into digital works of fiction. Intuitively, I am most interested in creating a fantasy-RPG style narrative. However, there is also a will within me to exercise my skills in other genres I am less comfortable performing in. I am also intrigued to see how other literary genres such as melodramas and magical realisms perform in the digital space. I am, however, seriously considering if I could expand on the functions of a toolkit like the Blackout Poetry Tool.</p>

## Week Five
<p>In _No Sense of an Ending: Hypertext Aesthetics_, E. J. Aarseth propels the notion that digital writing, specifically hypertext, maintains a significant degree of artistry, saying that the essence of such products “is close to that of a painting” (p. 81, 1997). This concurs with much of the same thought-processes reflected in my earlier entries. I am more confident in saying that the writer of electronic literature is more aligned with artistry, with its varying expressions and outcomes, than perhaps with traditional definitions of literature. Hypertext promotes accessibility and renewed potential for meaning-making for a user/reader through use of ergodics – explicit user choices. While traditional analogue literature requires a subjective interpretation acquired through reader effort, digital media allows for clear pathways discerned with minimal effort. Furthermore, Aarseth’s distinctions between what is a narrative, what is a game, and what is a hypertext are prudent. While physical literature possesses description and narration, and games by his definition possess description and ergodics, Aarseth states that hypertext engages with description, narration and ergodics. Thus, he places only certain analogue literatures into the category of hypertext. That is, choose-your-own-adventure books. This makes sense to me, for (as I understand it) these choice-based books are considered to be a catalyst for the hypertext transference to the digital medium that occurred from the 1990s through to the present day. Aarseth however makes the distinction that hypertext in his mind is not a standalone genre, but an “ideological” and “technological” category with its own conventions (ergodics among them), through which meaning is evoked with the implementation(p. 79, 1997).</p>
<p>It is also interesting to note the inherent temporality that exists in the products of digital literature. We have seen this in previous works discussed such as Taroko Gorge, with each of its lines of poetry ascending out of frame to be replaced by something new. Temporality is also observed when we consider the now-dissolved engines and platforms that once powered and reposited digital data on the internet. Each time a user interacts with a work of digital hypertext, it has the potential to provide a different outcome to the last.</p>

## Week Six
### House on the Hill
<p>House on the Hill uses Bitsy to craft a horror story. The minimalistic two-line text box in the opening sequence presents an unsettling tone, provoking the user to read on in suspended anticipation. The upbeat music combined with the compromising position the fiction places the user within subverts the horror genre it is working within. The only comfort within the sustained discomfort of the piece is the knowledge that by passing over the markers on the ground the user has the potential to interact with the world. The feeling of threat to the user is heightened by their involvement in the story. By situating the user as the protagonist, the fear for their own mortality is triggered. These feelings are reduced on subsequent play throughs, yet it does not altogether deteriorate.</p>
<p>Considering my own work of interactive fiction (which has now shifted in its narrative to an ambient, disruptive plotline exploring memory through sleeplessness), I am wondering how I can subvert genre in the same way House on the Hill does. I situate my piece in the absurdist drama genre, what affordance does it have to inject instances of humour? Could this juxtapose the melancholic gloom that is present in the rest of the piece? What would happen if I introduced images or sound to the narrative? Does this waver further into the videogame category than I am willing to go? Perhaps it could add a dimension not otherwise present if I did so. What role might aesthetics play in the accessibility of the piece? Will it make the hypertext more alluring for first time users, or does it risk overshadowing the quality of the writing if I rely too heavily on image?</p>
